2021-12-21
Creating a basic throwback blog generator
Alex

# My First Journal Entry

The throwback blog generator was a fun node exploration.  There is no shortage of bare bones blog generators, but I thought it would be fun to create my own.  My requirements were:

- Write blog entries in markdown
- A simple build process that converts markdown into HTML
- No (or very minimal) javascript on the front end. I wanted this blog to be _actually_ super lightweight.
- One click deploy


## Blog Generator!

The basic setup of the blog generator app used for this site is below.  Blog posts and the basic info pages are all written in the `/markdown` directory.  When `build.js` runs, it parses the markdown and generates the static HTML pages in the `/public` directory.  Any entries that are edited / created / deleted in `/markdown` are automatically updated in `/public` after running `build.js`

```bash
├── build.js
├── index.html
├── markdown
│   ├── entries
│   └── pages
├── public
│   ├── entries
│   └── pages
```

## Tooling

The only 3 non-standard packages used for this project were:

1. `marked` - simple library for parsing markdown into HTML
2. [Github Markdown CSS](https://github.com/sindresorhus/github-markdown-css) - some basic CSS for styling the HTML to mirror how Github renders HTMLified md.
3. `highlight.js` - an NPM package that does syntax highlighting for the HTMLified md.


## Fun Learnings

Doing syntax highlighting in the exported HTML was super easy thanks to markdown + highlight.js
This code runs during the build process + then some basic css is required to style the HTML.

```javascript
marked.setOptions({
  renderer: new marked.Renderer(),
  highlight: function (code, lang) {
    const hljs = require('highlight.js');
    const language = hljs.getLanguage(lang) ? lang : 'plaintext';
    return hljs.highlight(code, { language }).value;
  },
  langPrefix: 'hljs language-', // highlight.js css expects a top-level 'hljs' class.
  pedantic: false,
  gfm: true,
  breaks: false,
  sanitize: false,
  smartLists: true,
  smartypants: false,
  xhtml: false
});
```

One click deploy was accomplished with the following script.  Learned some silly bash / github scripting that enabled me to add a commit message with the current date.

```json
  "scripts": {
    "start": "node index.js",
    "dev": "nodemon index.js",
    "deploy": "node build.js && git add . && git commit -m \"updated: `date +'%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S'`\" && git push origin master"
  },
```


## Deploy

Using `Github Pages` static site hosting, which was very simple to set up.  The one gotcha is that Github pages uses [Jeykll](https://jekyllrb.com/) to render static sites.  Since the whole point of this exploration was to create a static site generator, I needed to add a `.nojekyll` file to the root directory of the project in order to have github simply serve the static pages.