{
"date": "2022-01-07",
"title": "Basic 0-dependency Service Worker w/ React",
"author": "Alex",
"description": "Building a dead-simple background data fetcher with React and service workers.",
"url": "service-workers"
}

# Building a dead-simple background data fetcher

This post outlines a very basic implementation of service workers in a simple React app.

### The Problem

It's usually safe to assume that our friends at the back end engineering department have created a flawless API that is quick, deterministic and relialbe. An API where you only have to call it once and get back all the relevant data. For those times when this assumption _does not_ hold, it might become necessary to do some front end sorcery in order to make your app fast.

For a project recently, we were dealing with an API that had data split across several endpoints, specifically to render a single page required a minimum of 12 requests that were taking anywhere from 50-200ms. Obviously this created quite a bottleneck when the page renders.

### Enter Service Workers!

What is a service worker? A serivce worker is a script that runs in the background of your app that allows it do non blocking functionality (like fetching remote data!). Our app is built with react and there are no shortage of helpful npm libraries -- however, I wanted to see if it was possible to write one in pure javascript. The following is a skeleton of our app layout:

```bash
├── components
│   ├── App.jsx
├── worker.js
```

We're going to load the service worker in App.jsx and the background process is going to run in worker.js. Thats it!

```javascript
//creating a worker in your app and listening to data
let worker = new Worker('reallyslowfile.js');
worker.addEventListener('message', (e) => console.log(e.data));
worker.postMessage('message we want to send to worker');

//the worker that is going to do something really slow
self.addEventListener(
  'message',
  async function (e) {
    console.log('lets do something with: ', e.data);
    let response = doSomethingSlowWithData(e.data);
    self.postMessage(response);
  },
  false
);
```

In this way we have two threads running in the browser, the worker is running in App.jsx and listening for any new message from the worker. The App can also push data to the background process for doing things.

### Solving our multi-API problem

App.jsx

Our app is a basic e-commerce app that lets users view a product. When a user selects a new product, we want to have our service worker pre-fetch the API data for all the related products that the user _might_ click on next.

```javascript
// load in our App.jsx
const backgroundCacher = new Worker(new URL('../worker.js', import.meta.url));

// when our App component mounts, create the service worker listener
componentDidMount() {
  backgroundCacher.addEventListener('message', function (e) {
    console.log('Message from Worker: ' + e.data);
  });
}

// When the user changes the page (sele)
selectNewProduct() {
  doSomeReactStateUpdating();
  let ids = idsThatWeWantToPreFetch();
  //send the ids to the service worker
  backgroundCacher.postMessage(ids);
}
```

Thats it! Our react app is now set up to do two things (1) listen for responses from the service worker (2) sends a message to the background process telling it to pre-fetch.

Our service worker:

```javascript
self.addEventListener(
  'message',
  async function (e) {
    let result = [];
    for (i = 0; i < e.data.length; i++) {
      let data = await fetchDataFromTerribleAPI(e.data[i]);
      result.push(data);
    }
    self.postMessage(result);
  },
  false
);
```

We're done! The script has been running in the background while the user is happily browsing our App. After 5-10 seconds when all the API calls finish running, the worker will post the result back to our event handler.

All the handler does now is `console.log` but in practice we would re-render the page with the fresh data.

### Bonus Problem

Kicking off a bunch of API calls in the background resulting in getting rate limited. As a result we implemented some basic throttling using an npm library called localforage that stores data in IndexedDB. (Side note: standard browser local storage is NOT shared between service workers and the thread running your app). The localforage library provides a simple get/set interface similar to localstorage to access the db.

```javascript
//logging each API call
let data = await localforage.getItem('apicalls')
await localforage = localforage.setItem('apicalls', [...data, new Date().getTime()]);

//in our service worker
const getAPICallsInLastMinute = () => {
  let threshold = new Date().getTime() - 60 * 1000;
  return localforage.getItem('apicalls').filter(x => x > threshold).length;
}

//go to sleep app!
const sleep = (ms) => new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, ms));

while(getAPICallsInLastMinute() > 50){
  await sleep(5000);
}
```
